# sorting algorithms

One of the two workshops offered for the Algorithms and Data Structures course at the University of Ferrara.

This is a modular benchmarking framework for comparing various optimizations across sorting algorithms.

The following algorithms are implemented:

- insertion sort;
- merge sort;
- hybrid insertion-merge sort;
- quick sort;
- quick sort with median-of-three partition;
- tail-recursive quicksort;
- hybrid insertion-quick sort;
- heap sort;
- tim sort;
- introspective sort.

You can customize your benchmarking via a configuration file (see the Usage section).
The running time of each algorithm is printed as an explicit matrix in the results folder;
optionally, if gnuplot is installed on your system, a plot is generated too.

Certain algorithms are designed to exploit existing patterns in data (e.g., tim sort);
you can customize how testing inputs are generated by implementing your own interface to the experiments (see the signatures in sort.h).

# Usage

Fill your configuration file by following the example in `config/config.toml.example`.
Run `make` and execute the binary, providing the relative path of your configuration as the second argument.

# Schema

This is an overview of the project.

```mermaid
flowchart TB

    MAIN["main"]

    subgraph Configuration
        CONFIG["config"]
        TOML["tomlc17"]
        STRUCT["struct configuration"]
    end

    subgraph Experiments
        BENCH["benchmark"]
    end

    subgraph External Logic
        SORT["sort"]
        PLOT["plot"]
    end

    MAIN -->|load| CONFIG
    CONFIG -->|read TOML| TOML
    CONFIG -->|populate| STRUCT

    MAIN -->|execute| BENCH
    BENCH -->|fetch parameters| STRUCT

    BENCH -->|genera input| SORT
    BENCH -->|execute algoritmo| SORT
    BENCH -->|test| SORT

    BENCH -->|plots| PLOT
```

The `Configuration` module has two responsibilities: defining the configuration structure and loading it. 
A possible example is given below.

```mermaid
classDiagram

class configuration {
    char name[NAME_BUF]

    char algorithms[ALGO_BUF][NAME_BUF]
    uint8_t algorithm_count

    uint8_t step

    uint32_t repetitions

    uint64_t min_size
    uint64_t max_size

    uint64_t seed
}
```

The `main` function is the entry point of the programme and acts as the driver for the experiments.

The loading of the configuration is delegated to a `Configuration` module, which fills a structure (see above) to be passed to the `Experiments` module.

The experiments are responsible for:
    1. iterating through a list of algorithms whose performance is to be measured;
    2. for each algorithm, generating a random input;
    3. calling the algorithm and measuring its execution time;
    4. saving the measured time;
    5. checking the correctness of the algorithm;
    6. repeating step 2 as specified by the configuration;
    7. returning the average of the execution times.

Note that steps 1, 2, and 5 of the process above do not know in advance which logic to call.
A responsibility is therefore added to the `Experiments` module: that of exposing three interfaces.

```mermaid
graph TD
    Benchmark[Benchmark]

    Generator[Input generator]
    AlgorithmSelection[Algorithm selector]
    Test[Test strategy]

    Benchmark -->|espone interfaccia| Generator
    Benchmark -->|espone interfaccia| AlgorithmSelection
    Benchmark -->|espone interfaccia| Test
```

The `External logic` module implements these interfaces.

Because of this, you could try to extend this package and also handle the benchmarking of more complex algorithms or operations of certain data structures.

```mermaid
graph BT
    Generator[Input generator]
    AlgorithmSelection[Algorithm selector]
    Test[Test strategy]

    Sort[Sorting]

    Sort -->|implements interface| Generator
    Sort -->|implements interface| AlgorithmSelection
    Sort -->|implements interface| Test
```

Last but not least, we want to write the results.
The simplest way is to print them as a matrix in the results folder.
However, if available, `gnuplot` ([see here](http://webusers.fis.uniroma3.it/~meneghini/LPC/files_lezioni/Guida_gnuplot.htm)) is leveraged.

